---
layout: post
author: yco
---

## Setup Github Pages site with Jekyll
Jekyll is a static site generator with built-in support for Github Pages. For more information about Jekyll, check this [link](https://jekyllrb.com)

### Prerequisites
* github account (see this [link)](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/signing-up-for-github/signing-up-for-a-new-github-account) for creating a github account)
* Jekyll requires the following 
    - Ruby version 2.5.0 or higher
    - RubyGems
    - GCC and Make

see [installation](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/installation/#requirements) guide for more details.

### Creating a repository for your site.
1. Login to [github](https://github.com/login) with your github account.
2. In the upper-right corner of any page, use the  drop-down menu, and select **New repository**.
3. Enter "jekyll-hello-world" for the name of the repository.
4. Enter a short description for the newly created repository.
5. Make the repository public.
6. Initialize the repository with README.
7. Create the the repository.

### Creating a Jekyll site 
1. Run **jekyll new PATH** to create a new site in **PATH**
```yml
$ jekyll new jekyll-hello-world
:
New jekyll site installed in ./jekyll-hello-world
```
2. Move into the new site directory
```yml
$ cd jekyll-hello-world
```
The following files and configurations are generated.
```yml
$ ls -1
404.html
Gemfile
Gemfile.lock
_config.yml
_posts
about.markdown
index.markdown
```
- site source - directory where jekyll will read files.<br  />
- _config.yml - contains settings that Jekyll uses as it processes your site. An empty config file will use default values for building a Jekyll site.<br  />
- _post - location where your blog posts live. You typically write posts in Markdown, HTML is also supported.<br  />
- _site - jekyll builds the site and outputs a static site to this location. This folder keeps updating everytime you make changes on your project. You can then copy the final output on this folder and put them over on a web server.<br  />
- Gemfile and Gemfile.lock - are used by Bundler to keep track of the required gems and gem versions you need to build your Jekyll site. Gem-based themes make it easier for theme developers to make updates available to anyone who has the theme gem. When there’s an update, theme developers push the update to RubyGems.<br  />
- 404.html, about.markdown and index.markdown - default web pages generated by jekyll.<br  />
<br  />
3. Let's build the files and configurations and serve it up on your local web server.
```yml
$ bundle exec jekyll serve
Configuration file: ./jekyll-hello-world/_config.yml
            Source: ./jekyll-hello-world
       Destination: ./jekyll-hello-world/_site
 Incremental build: disabled. Enable with --incremental
      Generating... 
       Jekyll Feed: Generating feed for posts
                    done in 1.757 seconds.
 Auto-regeneration: enabled for './mysite'
    Server address: http://127.0.0.1:4000/
  Server running... press ctrl-c to stop
```
4. View the new site. Open any browser and enter the server address *http://127.0.0.1:4000/* or *localhost:4000*

### Customizing
*Note Front matter is a snippet of YAML placed between two triple-dashed lines at the start of a file. You can use front matter to set variables.*
```yml
---
---
```

Edit the *_config.yml* file and set the following variables.
```yml
title: [The title of your blog]
description: [A short description of your blog's purpose]
author:
  name: [Your name]
  email: [Your email address]
```
### Creating a post
To create a post, add a file to your _posts directory with the following format:
```yml
YEAR-MONTH-DAY-title.MARKUP
```
Where YEAR is a four-digit number, MONTH and DAY are both two-digit numbers, and MARKUP is the file extension representing the format used in the file. For example, the following are examples of valid post filenames:
```yml
2021-08-12-how-to-write-a-blog.md
```

All blog post files must begin with front matter which is typically used to set a layout or other meta data. For example of post:
```yml
---
layout: post
title:  "Hello World!"
---

Hello world!, this is my first Jekyll blog post.
```

You can add **more posts** to make your site more interesting.

### Update the About page
Open the about.markdown file. Write something about you and what you do.

View the new site. Open any browser and enter the server address *http://127.0.0.1:4000/* or *localhost:4000* and have a look through your updated About page and blog posts.

### Hosting on Github Pages
Configuring a publishing source for your GitHub Pages site.
1. On GitHub, navigate to your site's repository.
2. Under your repository name, click  Settings.
3. In the left sidebar, click Pages.
4. On Github Pages, select gh-pages branch as the publishing source.
5. You site is published at https://username.github.io/repository/

Push your site to Github Pages site.
1. Initialize you site as local git repository
```yml
$ git init
```
2. checkout a new branch named gh-pages.
*Note* that  the publishing source for your project site is the gh-pages branch.
```yml
$ git checkout -b gh-pages
Switched to a new branch 'gh-pages'
```
3. Update the index using the current content found in the working tree, to prepare the content staged for the next commit
```yml
$ git checkout -b gh-pages
Switched to a new branch 'gh-pages'
```
4. Create a new commit containing the current contents of the index and the given log message describing the changes.
```yml
$ git commit -m "add initial files for my new site"
```
5. Push your local git repository for your site
```yml
git remote add origin https://username.github.io/repository.git
git push -u origin gh-pages
```
6. View your site at https://username.github.io/repository/

















